From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes, a weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number 542. In this
episode, Scott talks with dr.
about exploring code smells
in code written by children.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes today. I'm talking
with Filene Filene has a
PhD and as an assistant
professor at Delft university of
technology, and she researches the
application of software engineering methods
on a number of different
things. What are you working
on right now? So my
most recent paper that we're
going to present in September
is about, so for engineering
methods for young kids, how
young, well, any age, what
we did is we looked
at the programming language scratch.
Do you know, scratch Absolutely
scratches like the canonical example
for, for you? Yeah, it's
a visual programming language is
made by MIT and it's
a standalone app, but it's
also in the browser. So
it's very easy for kids
to play with. And they
have a public proposal story
of 14 million programs. And like,
don't get up. Kids can
take each other's programs and
remix them, which is like
forking. So that also means
that quality is important because
if kids go online, look
at programs, games have other
kids. They like, they can
look at the internals at
the source code and make
changes and make their own
version of programs. So you
can imagine that if it's
full of code smells, then
that's not so easy for
kids to work with. But
if you've got like, when
you said 14 million, I kind
of was surprised. I thought
you might say 14,000 or
140,000. I didn't expect 14 million.
So then my first impression
would be that wouldn't that
make the long tail really
long. Wouldn't the vast majority
of them just be garbage.
Hello worlds. Yeah, that's true.
So we didn't inspect all
14 million of them. We do
the sample of 250,000 programs.
Put your rights. For example,
about half of the programs
doesn't even have programming logic.
So it's just pictures and
images or sounds that kids
like to play with because
apart from being programming platforms,
scratch, it's also very creative.
It's like crayons or pencils,
but on a computer. So
it gets just use it
to make pictures or drawings,
but then the other half,
which is it's not even
really a long tail, that's
a substantial portion of the
programs. He is serious and
use a serious programming concepts.
Okay. So do you do
some kind of cyclometic complexity
analysis and figure out that
this is sophisticated and this
is not, and then, you
know, throw out the, the
junky ones. Yeah, Exactly. We,
we, in fact did measure
cyclometic complexity for programs. And
for example, we found that
out of the tune of
50,000 programs, 20,000 programs use
procedures. So they create methods
within their scratch program and
all of the programs with
methods over half of them,
56% of the procedures has
a psychometric complexity bigger than
two. So they have at
least one Cision point. Oh,
wow. Okay. So these are
kids that are like 10
or 11, or how old
are we talking? Yeah, sadly
enough. We don't know the
ages of the kids that
made the program. So some
of them may be, you
may be created by teachers
or parents that are energetic
to help their kids program,
or maybe they just liked
scratch themselves because I must
admit, I have made some
scratch programs that weren't necessarily
related to my research. I
will admit that I have
created a fluffy bird club
and just for my own
enjoyment. So we though for
this specific study, we don't
have the agents, but because
we have so many of
those programs, it's very likely
that lots of them are
made by kids. Okay. So
you wouldn't know if some
50 year old scratch expert
snuck in, but presumably they
would be a little bit
rare. Yeah. So in a
full up study that we're
running now we did an
online, we created an online
scratch course. So if you
videos and lessons for kids
to learn, scratch with, and
we made them available on
the edX platform. So it
is a platform for them
online learning. And for those
kids, we, we did ask
them specifically what their age
is, what they think of
programming, where do they like
it on? And for their
programs, it won't be as
many, but then we will
have in our next study
a little bit more information
about what their background is
for our generation. And for
example, also what are their
siblings are programming? What are
they are doing it under
supervision of parents or by
themselves. So stay tuned for
my next study. Okay. So
let me see if I
understand this and kind of
paraphrase it back to you.
You've got this Corpus of
anonymous scratch programs. You don't
know anything about the authors
you're, you're, you're effectively Google
in that you're a spider
sucking in all of these
programs and you have no
additional metadata about the programs,
gender, age, anything, and you
can make judgments only on
the code based on looking
at them. But then you
have your secondary, you know,
coming soon Corpus where you'll
have an, like a survey
alongside it and you'll have
all sorts of information, would
you then be able to
correlate the two? Yeah. That's
so that's her plan. We
were interested in seeing how
much alike our kids in
our online program are to
the general public that we
find in scratch. And this
is specifically interesting because in
the study that we're doing
in the online course, we
are specifically teaching kids about
code smells and duplication. So
we're explaining them from the
beginning of the course, this
is an if statement, and
this is a loop. And
also don't combine all your
blocks together in very long
groups, because that will be
harder to reach in another
study. We did. So that's
not the study where we
scratched, where we scraped the
scratch programs, but this is
a study. We performed at
a high school in the
Netherlands. We did a controlled
experiments. We had four high
school classes and we randomly
gave them either a smelly
version of a scratch program
or a perfect version. And
we measured how they perform
differently if we gave them
a smelly version. And then
we had long methods smell
and also duplication smells so
versions with lots of code
clones. And we were able
to measure that indeed gets
performed way worse on programs
with long method smell it's
way harder for them to
read. So this was of
course what we would have
expected because these results have
been found in the context
of professional developers as well.
So we know for a
fact that combining all your
scratch blocks is bad because
it will be harder for
other kids to read. So
from the start in our
online material, we educate kids
about good silver engineering methods.
And then our hope is
that they will produce less
smelly programs than the general
sample. Interesting. Let's just take
one quick, second and redefine
or define a more clearly
code smell because first I
think there are a lot
of people who use, use
this term all the time,
but there may be people
who maybe don't have English
as their first language who
have not heard that term
code smell too much. It's
almost like a sixth sense,
isn't it? That you have
to develop? Yeah. Yeah. It's
often a term that leads
to giggles among people that
aren't used to the term.
So a goat's smell is
a part of a program.
It doesn't necessarily have to
be an error. It can
function totally correct. However, it's
not structured optimal for, let's
say human consumption. It's not
as easy to read or
to maintain to change as
could be possible. And sort
of the canonical example is
a very long method. We've
all seen a hundred or
200 or thousands line methods,
and maybe it has a
very generic name, like set
up or execute or run.
So it there's nothing really
there to help you understand
it. There isn't an abstraction
because it's a method, but
it's so big that it
sort of loses its value.
These eight goats smell and
another famous example is called
Cote clones or sometimes called
duplication. If you're doing the
same or something very similar
in many different places of
the program, then suppose you
have to change it in
one place. You shouldn't forget
to also change it somewhere
else. So that's not so
much an understandability issue or
a readability, but that's really
a main maintenance issue because
if you are going to
change it, you will likely
forget some of the versions
of the clones and then
you have half working program.
Okay. So there's, there are,
you know, patterns in software
engineering that we want to
use there they're like ideal
patterns. And then there's kind
of anti-patterns I guess, code
smells or kind of anti-patterns.
Yeah, definitely. Usually anti-patterns is
used patterns in general, I
think is used on a,
on a bit more higher
level is more when we're
talking about architecture, but yeah,
in general, they're the same
thing. There are things we
like, which are patterns, design
patterns, and they're things we
are that are collations of
a design pattern and you
can call them at anti-pattern
for smells. And Martin Fowler
says that the, the, the
term was coined by Kent
Beck when they were working
on the book called refactoring.
And the thing that he
says, I think is really
interesting is that it's quick
to spot, like the definition
of a smell is it's
not something that you hunt
for. You develop a sense
don't you, that something is
wrong. Are you hoping that
the kids will have an
inherent code census smelly smelling
sense? Yeah, definitely. That would
be so nice because one
of my secrets shake your
motivations for this project. And
it's not all that secret
because I'm telling you over
the internet now is those
kids that are playing with
scratch. Now in 10 years,
they will be in my
classroom. They will be 18
year olds see as undergrads.
And they ha some of
our CS freshmen have an
experience of 10 to 15
years programming behind them nowadays.
So then I tell them,
and one of the first
lessons, Hey, hello, you should
test your code and her
like, test why I've never
tested code. You shouldn't call
all your variables VAR one,
two, three, and you shouldn't
call your puppets in your
game. Sprite one, two, three,
but this is what they're
used to because lots of
programming education in that kids
nowadays is very much that
it's programming education, but so
far engineering, we know that
it's not just you making
a game, you see with
scratch with the fact that
kids can remix their programs.
It's very much a social
and never, and maybe they
won't want to come back
to their scratch program in
three years, or maybe someone
else wants to reuse it
tomorrow. So if we don't
teach them about TDD and
refactoring from the start, we
will be too late. If
they've already been exposed to
so many programming environments and
ideas, but more to the
underlying, or let's say, and
compassing. So for engineering methods
that are also part of
creating great software, I think
that the part that stood
out though, that you just
said there was that they
might come back in three
years and I thought to
myself, well, that's an eternity
when you're 12. Yeah, exactly.
Yeah. So we were Thinking
about lots of exercises that
we can do. So, so
our online course was, was
quite successful. So we're definitely
going to do a rerun
in the next academic year.
So we're thinking of exercises
where we're just going to
have kids swap source codes,
for example. So here's a
project you get from someone
else in this course, and
they've done maybe the same
exercise or maybe a slightly
different exercise and are you
change it? Or you read
it, you document it. And
we hope that if we
put them in the shoes
of maintainers, rather than just
in the shoes of a
single program or making stuff
for themselves, that they will
also experience how to do,
how to make a project
that's easy to maintain. Right?
And I think another way
to phrase it is that
you're teaching them a kind
of empathy. When you say
put them in the shoes
of, you're saying, be empathetic
to future you and to
your other people who might
come upon your, your program
and want to remix it.
And lots of programming, lots
of introductory programming material is
very goal driven. And of
course that's cool. I mean,
it's cool. You have a
puzzle and you found, you
know, you found the shortest
path through to mace. You're
done, you get a point
or a coin and you
move on to the next
exercise. It's very encouraging and
engaging to get stuff done.
But often they're the angle
of looking back at your
code. Then this is what
Martin foller describes in his
refactoring book as well. Everything
is done. But now you're
going to look at your
source code and other time
and see what is better.
That's like the test refactoring
cycle and that they talk
about the test pass and
you go back to your
code. How can we make
this more pretty? And in
my experience, we've sampled lots
and lots of programming education
material that refactoring had. That's
not something that we teach
kids. And that is definitely,
I think we all agree
that that is a skill.
We want professional programmers who
have, and we spend a
little time in university, but
also outside in companies, coding
dojo is and stuff like
that, trying to teach that
empathy to developers. But, and
earlier we get to them
the better, the more that
they understand, that's a part
of programming to the better
they can decide, whether that's
a career for them. That's
so difficult though, because you're
also describing the larger human
characteristic of, of, you know,
delayed gratification, you know, do
this thing. And it will
be better at some unknown
point in the future. And,
you know, we can't do
that when we need to
eat good food and then,
you know, not die 30
years later to tell that
to a kid is difficult.
I think your point about,
well, I solve the problem,
right? It's almost like I
was doing, doing some long
division with my eight year
old yesterday. And he looked
at a problem and he
knew the answer. And my
wife said, well, show your
work. And he said, well,
I don't want to show
my work. I got the
right answer. It's done. And
that's basically all it compiled
and it ran, why are
we still talking about this?
Yeah. I mean, getting people
and including kids, which are
also people to have good
habits and to naturally want
to make things pretty, even
though there's more rewards immediately,
that that's difficult, but we
do think that tool support
could help there because the
RDE let's say to scratch
our ye it's not really
an IDE because it has
features that are mainly aimed
at writing codes, the way
it has scratches made it
doesn't have smell detection. It
doesn't have a refactoring angle.
And if you see my
papers, the research I've done
over the past year, and
if you're also familiar with
my work on Excel, it's
kind of clear where I'm
going, because an obvious next
step is to make an
IDE smell detection, angle engine
for scratch. So we've used
that in analyzing our two
50,000 programs, but we want
to make that user-facing. So
imagine an alternative scratch environment
where there would be a
counter for your code smells.
And that's the thing that
will give you points. If
you lower the code smells,
then you can make it
more visible to kids, whether
they're on the right track
or not. So if you
built in the detection of
this into a tool, like,
you know, things like ReSharper
and visual studio do with,
with, with C sharp and
F sharp, where they put
a little, a little light
bulb over code that they
think is weird. Or if
you think about word and
Excel, where they, you know,
word will put us red
squiggly for spelling errors and
a green squiggly for grammatical
errors, you could do that
for scratch, but doesn't, that
then become a crutch. I
mean, there are people who
say that, you know, you
shouldn't be using spell checkers
and in word, when you're
starting to write, because it
is a crutch and it
allows you to not learn
how to spell. Yeah, absolutely.
So, so in beginning of
the podcast, we talked a
little about a bit about
having that sense, that, that
spider sense that tells you
immediately, this is too long,
but that that's not something
professional developers were born with
either. That's something you get
by training. And after a
while, you don't need the
IDM at any more, maybe
to tell you that that
men have is too long,
you know it, but how
do you develop that sense?
So we definitely think that
tool support could help their
teach kids about, Oh, maybe
this is a little bit
too long, but also do
it in a challenging way.
You don't want to say
something that that's bad. Maybe
you want to just, it
could made a program. And
they're at that point where
they're maybe thinking about what's
my next move. And of
course you could set the
text that by looking at
mouse and keyboard movements, then
you could maybe show a
popup or an extra challenge.
Here's a quiz we've observed
by doing some small code
analysis that you could also
split this group of blocks
into. Do you see how
to do it? So then,
you know, it's not annoying.
It's a curse. It's more
an encouragement to think about
it. So we're definitely don't
think that every scratch game
you make, you want to
have no zero code smells
and everything should be perfect,
but we do think we
can encourage that reflection on
source code quality a little
bit more. There are something
like 80 or 89 different
code smells that have been
identified, but again, long tail
is long. What are the
code smells that you watched
for specifically, like, what are
the top two or three
code smells that, that, that
show up? Yeah. So there
are a few interesting code
smells that are scratched specific
that we looked at. So
scratch is an events driven
language where you can have
the environments where he acts
on events and an event
can be a mouse click,
for example, or key press,
but users can also generate
their own events. For example,
if I'm the main character
in my game and I
bumped a wall, I can
broadcast a signal I'm bumping
against this wall. And other
sprites can react to that
by for example, adopting a
point or playing sounds. So
a scratch specific smell is
where you create an event,
but there's no events handler.
No one is consuming that
signal. So we, we looked
at those sort of specific
scratch code smells. And other
than that, we sort of
tried to limit ourselves to
works existing, simple code smells
so long Mehta clone detection,
and a little bit of
naming it naming as well.
Because of course there are
some tradeoffs in code smells
because if you chop a
method up into lots of
different pieces, then they will
have to communicate with each
other and then increasing the
one smell is decreasing the
other smell. So for that
reason, we thought we were
just going to look at
some simple code smells, where
we can have actionable advice
to provide to kids because
something like feature envy where
one method is connected to
fuel for different class. Those
things are way too complex
to reason about, and not
just for us, because we
could do it as programmers,
but to communicate to a
kid what is happening and
why, and what is a
solution, isn't all that obvious.
Do you, are you going
to apply these learnings to
other languages? Is there something
about scratch that makes it
like the perfect programming language
as an example? Is it
the, is it the Corpus
of information that you're pulling
from other no other languages
that you could, you know,
spider? Yeah. So the reason
that's that when you look
at scratch is indeed because
it has a used public
repository. And also because it's
overtly made by researchers that
have thought about that because
they have a clear license
agreements that allows people to
inspect the programs if they're
shared. So if you're a
kid and you share your
program, you agree with the
whole world being able to
see and analyze and process
your program. So they've really
thought that through. And that's
also what enables us to
do this research. We couldn't
have done that on another
language because they don't have
the data. So for example,
a language like Blockly, that's
the language behind code.org, which
also very nice, very similar
also block-based language. It's very
similar to scratch. They have
not allowed with an API
or something, researchers to crawl
all that program. So it's,
it's the popular, the most
popular language, as far as
we know, that makes it
easy enough for us to
process, but there's no thing
there would be nothing against
doing something else. Suppose that
would be a website that's
collected by some programs written
by kids and also listed
kids' age and gender and
socioeconomic background of their parents.
And I would be very
interested in analyzing that too.
Interesting. Yeah. If you could
call covid.org and people like
that, and you could, like
you said, you could search
for it, but even more,
if they could take the
sum total of all of
their information and make it
available as a dataset or
dump of some kind. Yeah.
That would be, that would
be really, we would be
very happy if they would
do that because for scratch,
we am, I'm sure you
can provide some links with
both guests. So our scraping
program, and that includes a
parsing of the Jason format
of scratch. We've put that
online on Kitsap. So if
other people want to scratch
a scrape, the scratch ripple
story as well, and process
them for whatever other smells,
they, once we've made that
available for other people to
use. So that's why we
really want to encourage this
type of research. Because again,
you didn't expect 14 million programs
and I didn't know how
many are written every day,
but the thousands and thousands
of scratch programs are still
contributing every day. So is
there so much to learn
from about how kids program
and you can also of
course track these programs and
we don't have agents, but
we do have to use
your name of the program.
So you could even zoom
in on one user and
see how their programs evolve.
And you can also investigate
what in scratch. It's called
the remix tree. How the,
yeah, like the forking history
of a project, how people
are changing it, what they're
changing, what they're adding, what
you're removing. So a potential
angle we haven't followed yet,
but we could follow is
to see what kind of
refactoring gets applied themselves. So
you take snapshots of the
program and you see what
changes they make. Maybe there
are already improvements that they
are making for reasons we
don't know, maybe they are
renaming their scripts from Sprite.
One to flip it number
five, or gets the green
cats with red hat or
something like that. So that
could have an additional source
of refactoring because you can
only learn so much by
applying grownups or for engineering
to scratch. There might be
code smells or refactoring veterans
that are unique to kids
or unique to scratch that
we cannot invent by looking
at what responsible adult professional
developers do, because they're in
a totally different context. Yeah.
That seems like adding the,
The additional dimension of time
and, and then thinking about
scratch and how it moves
around their site as if
you think about it in
terms of get and get
hub and forking and cloning
would definitely be at a
whole new way of looking
at this. You know, you've
seen those, those D three
JS kind of graph, you
know, con kinetic crafts, where
someone points a system at
get hub and you get
this kind of family tree
over time to see an
application grow and change. You
could see how the child's
understanding of code. Yeah, exactly.
And see what blocks they
use. So we were in
our paper, we have an
analysis of all the blocks
that are used because the
blocks are divided in 10
different categories for sound and
movement and things like that.
So you could also see
how the toolbox of a
kid is maybe growing, but
maybe also shrinking. Maybe they
develop their own favorite habits
and don't use a certain
category or type anymore. After
a while. That's all stuff
we haven't explored yet, because
this was the first, the
first study of this guy.
And we just want it
to have a big overview
of the whole dataset, but
that's, those are things he's
human too for us, but
maybe also for other people.
So w what can we,
as professional engineers who are
listening, you know, learn from
this, as far as it
relates to our daily work.
And I wonder how often
we see people who have
been coding, as long as
these kids have been alive.
And have we forgotten our
sense of smell? Do we
just give up and write
smelly code and move on?
Because it's just so tiring.
Yeah. That's a very interesting
question. What can professional developers
learn? So I think one
of the things is project
abandonment is way greater in
the scratch program. So if
kids are done with a
game, they just drop it
and rebuild something else. They're
an old going to mess
with something clearly bad or
broken or super smelly. Whereas
in a professional context, of
course you have to, you
cannot just say, I don't
like this code base anymore.
I'm, I'm starting a new
with something else. So not
all the lessons I think
are, are translatable to a
professional contacts. I've found a
little bit, I found it
a little bit frustrating working
with professional engineers when you
start applying static analysis algorithms
to their code, because I've
always felt like the professional
engineer could just say, well,
it says you, you know,
like as a retort. So
I might say, well, you
know, I've taken a static
analysis and this code is
kind of smelly and here
are the smells, and it
has a cyclometic complexity of
X and that's bad. And
they can just say, well,
it says, you, you know,
I don't want your feedback.
Do, do the kids take
this feedback? And they change
the way that they think
about code right away, or
do they say, well, it
works. So it doesn't matter
if it's smelling. Yes. So
we don't know yet. That's
one of the things we
want to figure out in
that followup study, where we
educate kids about smells from
the start from lesson one,
we talk about code quality.
So we hope we hope
that will help. And also
what helps, I think, bode
in professional context, but also
with kids is to make
it very tangible and concrete.
So if you have results,
not the static analysis tool
says that, but Hey, if
you call your variable cat's
instead of Sprite, one, it
will take another kid 10
minutes less to read your
code or something like that.
So there are studies and
more and more studies like
that in software engineering are
being done studies with human
subjects where we really want
to measure, what is the
impact of a code smell?
How bad is it really?
Because we also have these
smells. Yeah. You can spend
the whole afternoon getting rid
of all your smells, but
what if you want for
you, for your customer, for
your developers team, the people
that also have to work
on the source code. So
I think making it very
quantifiable is a way to
make it easier for people
to understand why they need
to do the investment. Both
kids and professional developers Do,
do kids write smelly code
by default, like, like unchecked,
do they do just long
methods or two kids discover
functions on the, Yeah. So
for this data set, we
don't know what they found
on their own. The interface
of scratch of course, is
very encouraging to just try
stuff. And this is contrary
to code ORC with locally
that because that's not a
free playing environment, you get
four blocks and then you
make you do a puzzle.
And if you perform the
puzzle correctly, then you get
another, another block is unlocked.
So there are really, the
features are presented to kids
step by step. Whereas in
scratch, you can just in
school and make a new
block or something like that.
I didn't know any English
because my scratch usually in
Dutch nowadays, but it's some
way to create your own
blocks. You can click it
and you can see what
happens and, Oh, did this,
no, I'm not. I'm guessing
my own block that I
can use. So I don't
know if much of it
is self explored or from
a book or from a
parent or a teacher. That's
yeah. That's hard to measure
by just looking at the
program. That would be really
interesting to understand, but I'm
definitely looking forward to your
follow up, because I think
that, that, that a lot
of us who are, who
are listening to the show
have thought about, you know,
doing volunteer work or teaching
kids, whether it be our
own kids or the kids
that are in our lives
code in various ways, sometimes
scratch sometimes more advanced languages
like Java and C sharp.
But I know that I
haven't thought about including the
concept of smell right off
the bat. Yeah. And so
I said, well, we looked
at lots of programming, material,
grade books that are really
good and explaining programming essentially
do not talk about that.
So for engineering angle. So,
so don't beat yourself up
about not thinking about that
because apparently yeah, teaching programming,
maybe, maybe software engineering has
done a bad job of
marketing itself in a sense,
because apparently there's still a
very clear distinction between learning
to program and learning to
be a software engineer. Right.
I, but yeah, I am
a software engineering researcher, so
I may be slightly biased,
but I would say it's
a difference. Programming includes thinking
about the quality of your
programming testing is programming. It's
not testing and programming. It's
the same thing. But somehow
when we think about teaching
people programming, we're really focused
on making them able to
get stuff done and also
teaching them to reflect on
quality. Hmm. I really liked
that. That was like the
quote of the, of the
show, like, you know, testing
is engineering is part of
software. It shouldn't be treated
as a separate thing. Yeah,
it's true. So the earlier
we start the better. Mm
absolutely. So people can find
you@filene.com, F E L I
E N N E. And
I'll include links to your
blogs, your publications. And they
can all find that, including
public speaking, where you've spoken
and where you're going to
be speaking all on top
of your play, your blog
goes back with public speaking,
going back many, many years.
You're on, you're out there
in the world talking about
this stuff all the time.
Yeah. Yeah. So I spent
most of our research career
doing the same thing, the
same advocating work for Xcel
that I'm doing for scratch.
Now, Excel is a programming
language and we should think
about quality in spreadsheets. And
I'm pivoting a little bit
now towards programming education, but
the core of my work.
So friends new for the
masses, it goes back to
when I started my PhD
degree in 2008. That's fantastic.
Thanks so much for sharing
with me today. Thanks. It
was nice to be on
the show. This has been
another episode of Hanselminutes and
we'll see you again next
week.